good evening from the university of
miami convocation center in coral gables
florida i'm jim lehrer of the newshour on pbs
and i welcome you to the first of the
2004 presidential debates between president
george w
bush the republican nominee and senator
john kerry
the democratic nominee these debates are
sponsored by the commission on
presidential debates
tonight's will last 90 minutes following
detailed rules of engagement
worked out by representatives of the
candidates i have agreed to enforce
their rules on them the umbrella topic
is foreign policy and homeland security
but the specific
subjects were chosen by me the questions
were composed by me
the candidates have not been told what
they are nor
has anyone else for each question
there can only be a two-minute response
a 90 second rebuttal and at my
discretion a discussion extension of one minute
a green light will come on when 30
seconds remain
in any given answer yellow at 15
red at five seconds and then flashing
red means
time's up there is also a backup buzzer
system if needed candidates may not direct a
question to
each other there will be two-minute
closing statements
but no opening statements there is an
audience here in the hall
but they will remain absolutely silent
for the next
90 minutes except for now when they join
me in welcoming president bush and senator
kerry good evening mr president senator kerry
as determined by a coin toss the first
question goes to you senator kerry you have two
minutes do you believe you could do a better job
than president bush
in preventing another 9/11-type terrorist
attack on the united states
yes i do but before i answer further
let me thank you for moderating i want
to thank the university of miami
for hosting us and i know the president
will join me
in welcoming all of florida to this
debate you've been through the
roughest weeks anybody could imagine our
hearts go out to you
and we admire your pluck and
perseverance i can make american safer than president
bush has made us
and i believe president bush and i both
love our country
equally but we just have a different set
of convictions about how you make
america safe
i believe america is safest and
strongest when we are leading the world and we are
leading strong alliances
i'll never give a veto to any country
over our security
but i also know how to lead those
alliances this president has left them
in shatters across the globe and we're
now 90 percent of the casualties in iraq and 90
percent of the costs i think that's wrong
and i think we can do better i have a
better plan for homeland security
i have a better plan to be able to fight
the war on terror by strengthening our
military strengthening our intelligence
by going after the financing more
authoritatively by doing what we need to do to rebuild
the alliances by reaching out to the
muslim world
which the president has almost not done
and beginning to isolate the radical
islamic muslims not have them isolate
the united states of america
i know i can do a better job in iraq
i have a plan
to have a summit with all of the allies
something this president has not yet
achieved not yet been able to do to bring people
to the table we can do a better job of
training the iraqi forces to defend
themselves and i know that we can do a better job
of preparing for elections
all of these and especially homeland
security which we'll talk about a little
bit later
mr president you have a 90-second
rebuttal i too thank the university of
miami and
say our prayers are with the
good people of this state who've
suffered a lot
september the 11th
changed how america must look at the
world and since that day our nation has been
on a
multi-pronged strategy to keep our
country safer
we pursued al qaida wherever al qaida
tries to hide
seventy-five percent of known al qaida leaders
have been brought to justice
the rest of them know we're after them
we've upheld the doctrine that said if
you harbor a terrorist you're equally as
guilty as the terrorist and the taliban are no
longer in power
ten million people have registered to
vote in afghanistan in the upcoming
presidential election
in iraq we saw a threat and we realized
that after september the 11th we must
take threats seriously before they fully
materialize saddam hussein now sits in a prison cell
america and the world are safer for it
we continue to pursue our policy of
disrupting those who proliferate weapons
of mass destruction
libya has disarmed the a.q khan network
has been brought to justice
and as well we're pursuing a strategy of
freedom around the world because i
understand free nations will reject
terror free nations will answer the hopes and
aspirations of their people free nations
will help us achieve the peace we all
want new question mr president two minutes do
you believe the election of senator
kerry on november the 2nd
would increase the chances of the u.s
being hit by another 9/11-type terrorist
attack no i don't believe it's going to happen i
believe i'm going to win because the
american people know i know how to lead
i've shown the american people i know
how to lead
i have i understand everybody in this
country doesn't agree with the decisions
i've made
and i made some tough decisions but
people know where i stand
people out there listening know what i
believe and that's how best it is to keep the
peace this nation of ours has got a solemn
duty to defeat this ideology of hate
and that's what they are this is a group
of killers who will
not only kill here but kill children in
russia that'll attack unmercifully in iraq
hoping to shake our will we have a duty
to defeat this enemy we have a duty to
protect our children and grandchildren
the best way to defeat them is to never
waver to be strong to use every asset at our
disposal is to constantly stay on the offensive
and at the same time spread liberty and
that's what
people are seeing now is happening in
afghanistan ten million citizens have
registered to vote it's a phenomenal
statistic that if given a chance to be free they
will show up at the polls forty-one percent
of those 10 million are women in iraq
no doubt about it it's tough it's hard
work it's incredibly hard you know why
because an enemy realizes the stakes
the enemy understands a free iraq will
be a major defeat
in their ideology of hatred that's why
they're fighting so vociferously
they showed up in afghanistan when they
were there because they tried to beat us
and they didn't and they're showing up
in iraq for the same reason they're
trying to defeat us and if we lose our
will we lose
but if we remain strong and resolute we
will defeat this enemy
ninety second response senator kerry i
believe in being strong
and resolute and determined and i will
hunt down and kill the terrorists
wherever they are
but we also have to be smart jim
and smart means not diverting your
attention from the real war on terror in
afghanistan against osama bin laden
and taking if off to iraq where the 9/11
commission confirms there was no
connection to
9/11 itself and saddam hussein and where
the reason for going to war was weapons
of mass destruction not the removal of
saddam hussein
this president has made i regret to say
a colossal error of judgment
and judgment is what we look for in the
president of the united states of
america i'm proud that important military
figures who are supporting me in this race
former chairman of the joint chiefs of staff
john shalikashvili
just yesterday general eisenhower's son
general john eisenhower endorsed me
general admiral william crown general
tony mcbeak who ran the air force war so
effectively for his father
all believe i would make a stronger
commander in chief
and they believe it because they know i
would not take my eye off
of the goal osama bin laden
unfortunately he escaped in the
mountains of tora bora
we had him surrounded but we didn't use
american forces the best trained in the
world to go kill him
the president relied on afghan warlords
and he outsourced that job too
that's wrong new question two minutes
senator kerry
colossal misjudgments what colossal
misjudgments in your opinion has
president bush made in these areas
well where do you want me to begin
first of all he made the misjudgment of
saying to america
that he was going to build a true
alliance that he would exhaust the remedies of
the united nations and go through the
inspections in fact
he first didn't even want to do that and
it wasn't until former secretary of
state jim baker and general scowcroft
and others
pushed publicly and said you've got to
go to the u.n that the president
finally changed his mind his campaign has
a word for that
and went to the united nations now
once there we could have continued those
inspections we had saddam hussein trapped
he also promised america that he would
go to war as a last
resort those words mean something to me
as somebody who has been in combat last
resort you've got to be able to look in the eyes
of families and say to those parents
i tried to do everything in my power
to prevent the loss of your son and
daughter i don't believe the united
states did that and we pushed our allies
aside and so today we are 90 percent of the casualties
and 90
percent of the cost $200 billion $200
billion that could have been
used for health care for schools
for construction for prescription drugs
for seniors
and it's in iraq and iraq is not even
the center of the focus of the war on
terror the center is afghanistan where
incidentally there were more americans killed last
year than the year before where the
opium production is 75 percent of the world's
opium production
where 40 to 60 percent of the economy of
afghanistan is based on opium where the elections
have been postponed three times
the president moved the troops so he's
got 10 times the number of troops
in iraq than he has in afghanistan where
osama bin laden is
does that mean that saddam hussein was
10 times more important
than osama bin laden than excuse me
saddam hussein more important than
osama bin laden i don't think so ninety-second
response mr president
my opponent looked at the same
intelligence i looked at
and declared in 2002 that saddam hussein
was a grave threat
he also said in december of 2003 that
anyone who doubts
that the world is safer without saddam
hussein does not have the judgment
to be president i agree with him
the world is better off without saddam
hussein i was hoping diplomacy would work i
understand the serious consequences of
committing our troops into harm's way
it's the hardest decision a president
makes so i went to the united nations i didn't
need anybody to tell me to go to the
united nations i decided to go there
myself and i went there hoping that once and
for all the free world would act in
concert to get saddam hussein to listen to our
demands they passed the resolution that said
disclose disarm or face serious
consequences i believe when an
international body speaks it must mean
what it says
saddam hussein had no intention of
disarming why should he he had 16 other resolutions
and nothing took place
as a matter of fact my opponent
talks about inspectors
the facts are that he was systematically
deceiving the inspectors that wasn't
going to work
that's kind of a pre-september 10th
mentality the hope that somehow
resolutions and failed inspections would
make this world a more peaceful place
he was hoping we'd turn away but there was fortunately
others beside myself who
believed that we ought to
take action we did the world is safer
without saddam hussein
new question mr president two
minutes what about senator kerry's point
the comparison he drew between the
priorities of going after osama bin
laden and going after saddam hussein jim we've
got the capability of doing both
as a matter of fact this is a global
effort we're facing a
group of folks who have such hatred in
their heart they'll strike anywhere
with any means and that's why it's
essential that we have strong alliances
and we do
that's why it's essential that we make
sure that we keep weapons of mass
destruction out of the hands of
people like al qaida which we are
but to say that there's only one focus
on the war on terror doesn't really
understand the nature of the war on
terror of course we're after saddam hussein i
mean bin laden he's isolated
seventy-five percent of his people have been
brought to justice the killer
the mastermind of the september 11th
attacks khalid sheik mohammed
is in prison we're making progress
but the front on this war is more than
just one place
the philippines we've got help we're
helping them there to bring
to bring al qaida affiliates to justice
there and of course iraq is a central part in
the war on terror that's why zarqawi and
his people are trying to fight us
their hope is that we grow weary and we
leave the biggest disaster that could happen
is that we not succeed in iraq
we will succeed we've got a plan to do
so and the main reason we'll succeed is
because the iraqis want to be free
i had the honor of visiting with prime
minister allawi he's a strong courageous
leader he believes in the freedom of the iraqi
people he doesn't want u.s leadership however to
send mixed signals
to not stand with the iraqi people he
believes like i believe that
the iraqis are ready to fight for their
own freedom they just need the help to be
trained there will be elections in january we're
spending reconstruction money
and our alliance is strong that's the
plan for victory and when iraq is free
america will be more secure
senator kerry 90 seconds the president
just talked about iraq as a
center of the war on terror iraq
was not even close to the center of the
war on terror
before the president invaded it the
president made the judgment to divert
forces from under general tommy franks
from afghanistan before the congress
even approved it
to begin to prepare to go to war in iraq
and he rushed the war in iraq without a
plan to win the peace
now that is not the judgment that a
president of the united states ought to
make you don't take america to war unless
have the plan to win the peace
you don't send troops to war without the
body armor that they need i've met kids
in ohio
parents in wisconsin places iowa
where they're going out on the internet
to get the state-of-the-art body gear to
send to their kids some of them got it
for a birthday present
i think that's wrong humvees 10,000 out
of 12,000 humvees that are over there
aren't armored
and you go visit some of those kids in
the hospitals today who were maimed
because they don't have the armament
this president just i don't know if he
sees what's really happened over there
but it's getting worse by the day more
soldiers killed in june
than before more in july than june more
in august than july
more in september than in august and now
we see beheadings and
we got weapons of mass destruction
crossing the border every single day and
they're blowing people up
and we don't have enough troops there
can i respond to that let's do one of
these one-minute extensions you have 30
seconds thank you sir
first of all what my opponent wants
you to forget is that
he voted to authorize the use of force
and now says it's the wrong war at the
wrong time at the wrong place
i don't see how you can lead this
country to succeed in iraq if you say wrong war
wrong time wrong place what message does
that send our troops
what message does that send to our allies what
message does that send the iraqis
no the way to win this is to be
steadfast and resolved
and to follow through on the plan that
i've just outlined thirty seconds
senator yes we have to be steadfast and resolved
and i am
and i will succeed for those troops now
that we're there we have to succeed we
can't leave a failed iraq
but that doesn't mean it wasn't a
mistake of judgment to go there
and take the focus off of osama bin
laden it was now we can succeed but i don't
believe this president can
i think we need a president who has the
credibility to bring the allies back to
the table
and to do what's necessary to make it so
america isn't doing this alone
we'll come back to iraq in a moment but
i want to come back to where i began on
homeland security this is a two-minute
new question senator kerry
as president what would you do
specifically in addition to
or differently to increase the homeland
security of the united states than what
president bush is doing jim let me tell
you exactly what i'll do
and there are a long list of thing
first of all
what kind of mixed message does it send
when you have
$500 million going over to iraq
to put police officers in the streets of
iraq and the president is cutting the cops
program in america
what kind of message does it send to be
sending money to open firehouses in
iraq but we're shutting firehouses
who are the first responders here in
america the president hasn't put one nickel not
one nickel
into the effort to fix some of our
tunnels and bridges and
most exposed subway systems that's why
they had to close down the subway in new
york when the republican convention was
there we hadn't done the work that ought to
be done the president
95 percent of the containers that come into the
ports right here in florida are not inspected
civilians get onto aircraft and their
luggage is x-rayed
but the cargo hold is not x rayed does
that make you feel safer in america
this president thought it was more
important to give the wealthiest people
in america a tax cut
rather than invest in homeland security
those aren't my values
i believe in protecting america first
and long before
president bush and i get a tax cut and
that's who gets it
long before we do i'm going to invest in
homeland security
and i'm going to make sure we're not
cutting cops programs in america
and we're fully staffed in our firehouses
and that we protect the nuclear and
chemical plants the president also
unfortunately gave in to the chemical
industry which didn't want to do some of
the things necessary to strengthen our
chemical plant exposure
and there's an enormous undone job to
protect the loose nuclear materials in
the world
that are able to get to terrorists that's a
whole other subject
but i see we still have a little bit
more time let me just quickly say
at the current pace the president will
not secure the loose material in the
soviet union former soviet union
for 13 years i'm going to do it in four
years and we're going to keep it out of the
hands of terrorists
ninety-second response mr president i don't
think we want to get to how he's going
to pay for all these promises
it's like a huge tax gap
anyway that's for another debate
my administration has tripled the amount
of money we're spending on homeland
security to $30 billion a year
my administration worked with the
congress to create the department of
homeland security
so we could better coordinate our
borders and ports we've got 1,000 extra
border patrol on the southern border
want 1,000 on the northern
border we're modernizing our borders
we spent $3.1 billion for fire
and police $3.1 billion
we're doing our duty to provide the
funding but the best way
to protect this homeland is to stay on
the offense
you know we have to be right 100 percent
of the time
and the enemy only has to be right once
to hurt us
there's a lot of good people working
hard and by the way we've also
changed the culture of the fbi
to have counterterrorism as its
number one priority we're communicating
better we're going to reform our intelligence
services to make sure that we get
the best intelligence possible the
patriot act is vital
is vital that the congress renew the
patriot act which enables our law
enforcement to disrupt terror cells
but again i repeat to my fellow citizens
the best way to protection is to stay
on the offense
yes let's do a little yes 30 seconds
the president just said the fbi had
changed its culture
we just read on the front pages of
america's papers that there are over 100,000
hours of tapes unlistened to on one of
those tapes
may be the enemy being right the next
time and the test is not whether you're
spending more money
the test is are you doing everything
possible to make america safe
we didn't need that tax cut america
needed to be safe
of course we're doing everything we can
to protect america
i wake up every day thinking about how
best to protect america that's my job
i work with director mueller of the
fbi comes in my office when i'm in
washington every morning talking about
how to protect us there's a lot of
really good people working hard
to do so it's hard work but again i want
to tell the american people
we're doing everything we can at home
but you better have a president
who chases these terrorists down and
bring them to justice before they hurt
us again
new question mr president two minutes
what criteria
would you use to determine when to start
bringing u.s troops home from
iraq let me
first tell you that the best way
for iraq to be safe and secure is for
iraqi citizens to be trained
to do the job and that's what we're
doing we've got 100,000 trained
now 125,000
by the end of this year 200,000
by the end of next year that is the
best way we'll never succeed in iraq if
the iraqi citizens do not want to take
matters into their own hands to protect
themselves i believe they want to prime minister
allawi believes they want to and so
the best indication about when we can
bring our troops home which i really
want to do but i don't want to do so for
the sake of bringing them home i want to
do so because we've achieved an
objective is to see the iraqis perform and
to see the iraqis step up and take
responsibility and so the answer to your question is
when our general is on the ground
and ambassador negroponte tells me that
iraq is ready to defend herself from
these terrorists
that elections will have been held by
then that their stability and that they're
on their way to
you know a nation that's free
that's when and i hope it's as soon as
possible but i know putting artificial deadlines
won't work
my opponent at one time said well get me
elected i'll have them out of there in
six months
you can't do that and expect to
win the war on terror
my message to our troops is thank you
for what you're doing we're standing
with you strong we'll give you all the
equipment you need
and we'll get you home as soon as the
mission's done because this is a vital
mission a free iraq will be an ally in the war
on terror and that's essential
a free iraq will set a powerful example
in the part of the world that is
desperate for freedom
a free iraq will help secure israel a
free iraq will enforce the hopes and
aspirations of the reformers in places
like iran
a free iraq is essential for the
security of this country
ninety seconds senator kerry thank you jim
my message
to the troops is also thank you for what
they're doing but it's also
help is on the way i believe those
troops deserve better than what they are
getting today you know it's interesting
when i was in a rope line just the other
day coming out here from wisconsin
a couple of young returnees were in the
line one active duty one from the guard and
they both looked at me and said
we need you you've got to help us over
there now i believe there's a better way to do
this you know the president's father
did not go into iraq into baghdad beyond
basra and the reason he didn't is he said he
wrote in his book because there was no
viable exit strategy
and he said our troops would be
occupiers in a bitterly hostile land
that's exactly where we find ourselves
today there's a sense of american
occupation the only building that was guarded when
the troops when into baghdad
was the oil ministry we didn't guard the
nuclear facilities we didn't guard the
foreign office where you might have
found information about weapons of mass
destruction we didn't guard the borders
almost every step of the way our troops
have been left on these extraordinarily
difficult missions
i know what it's like to go out on one of
those missions when you don't know
what's around the corner
and i believe our troops need other
allies helping
i'm going to hold that summit i will
bring fresh credibility
a new start and we will get the job done
right all right go ahead yes sir i think it's
worthy for a follow-up sure
right we can do 30 seconds each here
all right my opponent says help is on
the way but
what kind of message does it say to our
troops in harm's way wrong war wrong
place wrong time not a message a
commander in chief gives or this is a
great diversion
as well help is on the way but it's
certainly hard to tell it when he voted
against the $87-billion supplemental
to provide equipment for our troops and
then said he actually did vote for it
before he voted against it
not what a commander in chief does when
you're trying to lead troops
senator kerry 30 seconds well you know
when i talked about the $87 billion
i made a mistake in how i talk about the
war but the president made a mistake in
invading iraq
which is worse i believe
that when you know something's going
wrong you make it right that's what i learned
in vietnam when i came back from that
war i saw that it was wrong
some people don't like the fact that i
stood up to say no but i did
and that's what i did with that vote and
i'm going to lead those troops to
victory all right new question two minutes
senator kerry speaking of vietnam you
spoke to congress in 1971
after you came back from vietnam and you
said quote how do you ask a man to be
the last man to die for a mistake
are americans now dying in iraq for a
mistake no
and they don't have to providing we have
the leadership
that we put that i'm offering i believe
that we
have to win this the president and i have
always agreed on that
and from the beginning i did vote to
give the authority because i thought
saddam hussein was a threat and i did
accept that
intelligence but i also laid out
a very strict series of things we needed
to do
in order to proceed from a position of
strength then the president in fact
promised them
he went to cincinnati and he gave a
speech in which he said
we will plan carefully we will proceed
cautiously we will not make war inevitable we will
go with our allies
he didn't do any of those things they
didn't do the planning they left the
planning of the state department in the
state department desks
they avoided even the advice of their
own general general shinsheki the army
chief of staff
said you're going to need several
hundred thousand troops instead of
listening to him
they retired him the terrorism czar
who has worked for every president since
ronald reagan said
invading iraq in response to 9/11 would
be like franklin roosevelt invading
mexico in response to pearl harbor that's what
we have here
and what we need now is a president who
understands how to bring these other
countries together
to recognize their stakes in this they
do have stakes in it
they've always had stakes in it the arab
countries have a stake in not having a
civil war
the european countries have a stake in
not having total disorder on their
doorstep but this president hasn't even held the
kind of statesman-like summits
that pull people together and get them
to invest in those states in fact
he's done the opposite he pushed them
away when the secretary general kofi
annan offered the united nations he said
no no we'll go do this alone
to save for halliburton the spoils of
the war
they actually issued a memorandum from
the defense department saying if you
weren't with us in the war
don't bother applying for any
construction that's not a way to invite
people ninety seconds that's totally absurd of
course the u.n
was invited in and we support the u.n
efforts there
they pulled out after sergio de mello
got killed but they're now back in
helping with elections
my opponent says we didn't have any
allies in this war
what's he say to tony blair what's he
say to
alexander kwasniewski of poland
you can't expect to build an alliance when
you denigrate the contributions
of those who are serving side by side
with american troops in iraq
plus he says the cornerstone of his plan
to succeed in iraq is to
call upon nations to serve so what's the
message going to be
please join us in iraq for a grand
diversion join us for a war that is the wrong war
at the wrong place at the wrong time i
know how these people think
i deal with them all the time i sit down
with the world leaders
frequently and talk to them on the phone
frequently they're not going to follow
somebody who says this is the wrong war
at the wrong place at the wrong time
they're not going to follow somebody
who says this is the wrong war at the wrong place at the wrong time they're not going to follow somebody whose core convictions keep changing
because of politics in america
and finally he says we ought to have a
summit well there are summits being
held japan is going to have a summit for the
donors
$14 billion pledged and prime
minister koizumi is going to call
countries to account to get them to
contribute and there's going to be an arab summit
of the neighborhood countries
and colin powell helped set up that
summit 30 seconds senator the united nations
kofi annan offered help after baghdad
fell and we never picked him up on that and
did what was necessary to transfer
authority and to transfer reconstruction
it was always american-run
secondly when we went in there were
three countries great britain australia
and the united states
that's not a grand coalition we can do
better thirty seconds mr president well actually he forgot poland
and now there's 30 nations involved
standing side by side with our american
troops and i honor their sacrifices and i don't
appreciate it when a candidate for
president denigrates
the contributions of these brave
soldiers you cannot lead the world
if you do not honor the contributions
of those who are with us he called them
coerced and the bribed
that's not how you bring people together
our coalition is strong
it will remain strong so long as i'm
the president
new question mr president two minutes
you have said
there was a quote miscalculation of what
the conditions would be
in post-war iraq what was the
miscalculation and how did it happen
no what i said was that because we
achieved such a rapid victory
more of the
saddam loyalists
were around i mean we thought we'd whip
more of them going in
but because tommy franks did such a great
job in planning the operations
we moved rapidly and a lot of the baathists
and saddam loyalists laid down
their arms and
disappeared i thought
they would stay and fight but they
didn't and now we're fighting them now
and it's hard work
i understand how hard it is i get the
casualty reports every day
i see on the tv screens how hard it is
but it's necessary work and i'm
optimistic see i think you can be
realistic and optimistic at the same
time i'm optimistic we'll achieve i know we
won't achieve if we send mixed signals
i know we're not going to achieve our
objective if we send mixed signals to
our troops
our friends the iraqi citizens
we've got a plan in place the plan says
there will be elections in january and
there will be
the plan says we'll train iraqi soldiers
so they can do the hard work and we are
and it's not only just america but nato
is now helping
jordan's helping train police uae is
helping train police
we've allocated $7 billion
over the next
months for reconstruction efforts and
we're making progress there
and our alliance is strong and as i just
told you there's going to be a summit
of the arab nations
japan will be hosting a summit we're
making progress
it is hard work it is hard work to go
from a tyranny to a democracy
it's hard work to go from a place where
people get their hands cut off
or executed to a place where people are
free but it's necessary work and a free
iraq is going to make this world a more
peaceful place
ninety seconds senator kerry
what i think troubles a lot of people in
our country is that the president
has just sort of described one kind of
mistake but what he has said is that even
knowing there were no weapons of mass
destruction even knowing there was no
imminent threat
even knowing there was no connection with
al qaida
he would still have done everything the
same way those are his words
now i would not so what i'm trying to do
is just talk the truth to the american
people and to the world the truth
is what good policy is based on it's
what leadership is based on
the president says that i'm denigrating
these troops
i have nothing but respect for the
british tony blair and for what
they've been willing to do
but you can't tell me that when the most
troops any other country has on the
ground is great britain with 8,300
and below that the four others are below
4,000
and below that there isn't anybody out
of the hundreds
that we have a genuine coalition to get
this job done
you can't tell me that on the day that
we went into that war and it started
it was principally the united states the
america and great britain and one or two
others that's it
and today we are 90 percent of the
casualties and 90 percent of the
costs and meanwhile north korea has got
nuclear weapons
talk about mixed messages the president
is the one that said we can't allow
countries to get nuclear weapons they
have i'll change that new question
senator kerry two minutes you just
you've repeatedly accused president bush
not here tonight but elsewhere before
of not telling the truth about iraq
essentially of lying to the american
people about iraq give us some examples of what
you consider to be
his not telling the truth well i've never
ever used the harshest word as you did
just then and i try not to i've been
but i'll nevertheless tell you that
i think he has not been candid with the
american people and i'll tell you exactly
how first of all we all know that in his
state of the union message he told
congress about nuclear materials
that didn't exist we know that he
promised america that he was going to
build this coalition i just described
the coalition
it is not the kind of coalition we were
described when we were talking about voting
for this
the president said he would exhaust the
remedies of the united nations and go
through that full process
he didn't he cut if off sort of
arbitrarily and we know that there were further
diplomatic efforts under way
they just decided the time for diplomacy
is over and
rushed to war without
planning for what happens afterwards now
he misled the american people in his
speech when he said we will plan
carefully they obviously didn't he misled the
american people when he said
we'd go to war as a last resort we did
not go as a last resort and most americans
know the difference
now this has cost us deeply in the world
i believe that it is important to tell
the truth to the american people
i've worked with those leaders the
president talks about i've worked with
them for 20 years for longer than this
president and i know what many of them say today
and i know how to bring them back to the
table and i believe that a fresh start new
credibility a president who can understand what we
have to do to reach out to the muslim
world to make it clear that this is not you
know osama bin laden uses the invasion
of iraq
in order to go out to people and say that
america has declared war on islam
we need to be smarter about now we wage
a war on terror
we need to deny them the recruits we
need to deny them the safe havens
we need to rebuild our alliances i
believe that
ronald reagan john kennedy and the others did
that more effectively and i'm going to
try to follow in their footsteps
ninety seconds mr president my opponent just
said something amazing he said
osama bin laden uses the invasion of
iraq as an excuse to spread hatred for
america osama bin laden isn't going to
determine how we defend ourselves
osama bin laden doesn't get to decide
the american people decide i decided
the right action was in iraq my opponent
calls it a mistake it wasn't a mistake
he said i misled on iraq i don't think
he was misleading when he called iraq a
grave threat in the fall of 2002
i don't think he was misleading when he
said that it was right to disarm
iraq in the spring of 2003
i don't think he misled you when he said
that you know anyone
who doubted whether the world
was better off without saddam hussein in
power didn't have the judgment to be president
i don't think he was misleading
i think what is misleading is to say you
can lead
and succeed in iraq if you keep changing
your positions
on this war and he has as the politics
change his positions change
and that's not how a commander in chief acts
let me finish the intelligence i
looked at
was the same intelligence my opponent
the very same intelligence and when
i stood up there and spoke to the
congress i was speaking off the same
intelligence he looked at to make his
decisions to support the authorization of
force thirty seconds we'll do a 30 second here
i wasn't misleading when i said he was a
threat nor was i misleading on the day that the
president decided to go to war when i
said that he had made a mistake in not
building strong alliances
and that i would have preferred that he
did more diplomacy i've had one position
one consistent position that saddam
hussein was a threat
there was a right way to disarm him and
a wrong way and the president chose
the wrong way
thirty seconds mr president the only thing
consistent about my
opponent's position is that he's been
inconsistent he changes positions and you cannot
change positions
in this war on terror if you expect to
win and i expect to win it's necessary
we win
we're being challenged like never before
and we have a duty to our country and to
future generations of america to achieve
a free iraq a free afghanistan and to
rid the world of weapons of mass
destruction new question mr president two minutes
has the war
in iraq been worth the cost of american
lives 1,052
as of today
you know every life is precious
every life matters you know my hardest
the hardest part of the job is to know
that i committed the troops in harm's
way and then do the best i can to provide
comfort for the loved ones who lost
a son or a daughter or a husband or wife
you know
i think about missy johnson she's a
fantastic lady i met in
charlotte north carolina she and her son
bryan they came to see me
her husband pj got killed he'd been in
afghanistan went to iraq
you know it's hard work to try to
love her as best as i can knowing full
well that the decision i made
caused her loved one to be in harm's
way i told her after we prayed and
teared up and laughed some
that i thought her husband's sacrifice
was noble and worthy
because i understand the stakes of this
war on terror
i understand that we must
find al qaida wherever they hide
we must deal with threats before they
fully materialize and saddam hussein
was a threat
and that we must spread liberty because
in the long run the way to defeat hatred
and tyranny and oppression is to spread
freedom missy understood that that's what she
told me her husband understood
so you say was it worth it
every life is precious
that's what distinguishes us from the
enemy everybody matters but i think it's worth
it jim
i think it's worth it because i think i
know in the long term
a free iraq a free afghanistan
will set such a powerful example in a
part of the world that's desperate for
freedom it will help
change the world that we can look back
and say we did our duty
senator 90 seconds
i understand what the president is
talking about because i know what it
means to lose people
in combat
and the question is it worth the cost
reminds me of my own thinking when i
came back from fighting in that war
and it reminds me that it is vital for
us not to confuse the war ever
with the warriors that happened before
and that's one of the reasons why i
believe i can get this job done
because i am determined for those
soldiers and for those families
for those kids who put their lives on
the line that is noble
that's the most noble thing that anybody
can do
and i want to make sure the outcome
honors that nobility
now we have a choice here i've laid out
a plan by which i think we can be
successful in iraq
with a summit by doing better training
faster by cutting by doing what we need to
do with respect to the u.n
and the elections there's only 25
percent of the people in there they
can't have an election right now
the president's not getting the job done
so the choice for america is you can
have a plan that i've laid out in four
points each of which i can
tell you more about or you can go to
johnkerry.com and see more of it
or you have the president's plan which
is four words
more of the same i think my plan is
better and my plan has a better chance of
standing up and fighting for those
troops i will never let those troops down and
will hunt and kill the terrorists
wherever they are
all right sir go ahead thirty
seconds yes i
understand what it means to the
commander in chief and if i were to ever
say this is the wrong war at the wrong time
at the wrong place
the troops would wonder how can i follow
this guy
you cannot lead the war on terror if you
keep changing positions on the war on
terror and say things like well this is just a
grand diversion
it's not a grand diversion this is an
essential that we get it right
and so the plan he talks about
simply won't work
senator kerry you have 30
seconds you have 30 seconds right and then
the president secretary of state colin powell told
this president
the pottery barn rule if you break it
you fix it
now if you break it you made a mistake
it's the wrong thing to do
but you own it and then you've got to fix
it and do something with it
now that's what we have to do there's no
inconsistency soldiers know over there that this isn't
being done right yet
i'm going to get it right for those
soldiers because it's important to
israel it's important to america it's
important to the world it's important to
the fight on terror
but i have a plan to do it he doesn't
speaking of your plan new question
senator kerry
two minutes can you give us specifics
in terms of a scenario time lines et cetera
for ending
major u.s military involvement in iraq
the time line that i've set out and again
i want to correct the president because
he's misled again this evening on what
i've said
i didn't say i would bring troops out in
six months i said
if we do the things that i've set out
and we are successful
we could begin to draw the troops down
in six months
and i think a critical component of
success in iraq
is being able to convince the iraqis and
the arab world
that the united states doesn't have
long-term designs on it
as i understand it we're building some
14 military bases there now and some
people say they've got a rather
permanent concept to them
when you guard the oil ministry
but you don't guard the nuclear
facilities the message to a lot of people is maybe
wow maybe they're interested
in our oil now the problem is that they
didn't think these things through
properly and these are the things you
have to think through
what i want to do is change the dynamics
on the ground
and you have to do that by beginning to
not back off of the fallujahs and other
places and send the wrong message to the
terrorists you have to close the borders
you've got to show you're serious in
that regard but you've also got to show
that you are prepared to bring the rest
of the world in and share the stakes
i will make a flat statement the united
states of america
has no long-term designs on staying in
iraq and our goal in my administration would
be to get
all of the troops out of there with a
minimal amount you need for
training and logistics as we do in some
other countries in the world
after a war to be able to sustain the
peace but that's how we're going to win the
peace by rapidly training the iraqis
themselves even the administration has admitted
they haven't done the training
because they came back to congress a few
weeks ago and asked for a complete
reprogramming of the money
now what greater admission is there 16
months afterwards
oops we haven't done the job we have
to start to spend the money now will you
guys give us permission to shift it over
into training
ninety seconds there are 100,000 troops
trained police
guard special units border patrol
there's going to be 125,000 trained
by the end of this year yes
we're getting the job done
it's hard work everybody knows it's hard
work because there's a determined enemy
that's trying to defeat us now my
opponent says he's going to try to
change the dynamics on the ground
well prime minister allawi was here he is
the leader of that
country he's a brave brave man when he
came after giving a speech to the congress
my opponent questioned his credibility
you can't change the dynamics on the
ground if you've criticized the brave leader of
iraq one of his campaign people alleged that
prime minister allawi was like a
puppet that's no way to treat somebody who's
courageous and brave that is trying to
lead his country forward the way to make
sure that we
succeed is to send consistent
sound messages to the iraqi people that
when we give our word
we will keep our word that we stand with
you that we believe you want to be free and
i do
i believe that 25 million
people the vast majority long
to have elections i reject this
notion and i'm suggesting my
opponent isn't i reject the notion
that some say that if you're muslim you
can't free you don't desire freedom i
disagree strongly disagree with that thirty seconds
i couldn't agree more that the iraqis
want to be free and that
they could be free but i think the
president again
still hasn't shown how he's going to go
about it the right way he has more of
the same now
prime minister allawi came here and he
said the terrorists are pouring over the
border that's allawi's assessment
the national intelligence assessment
that was given to the president in july
said best-case scenario more of the same of
what we see today
worst-case scenario civil war i can do
better yes let me yes 30 seconds the reason
why prime minister allawi said
they're coming across the border is
because he recognizes that this is a
central part of the war on terror
they're fighting us because they're
fighting freedom they understand that a
free afghanistan or a free iraq
will be a major defeat for them and
those are the stakes
and that's why it is essential we not
leave that's why it's essential we hold
the line that's why it's essential we win and
we will under my leadership we're going
to win this war in iraq
mr president new question two minutes does
the iraq
experience make it more likely or less
likely that you would take the united states
into another preemptive military action
i would hope i never have to i understand
how hard it is to commit troops
never wanted to commit troops
when i was running when we had the
debate in 2000 never dreamt i'd be doing
that but the enemy attacked us
jim and i have a solemn duty to protect
the american people
to do everything i can to protect us
i think that by speaking clearly
and doing what we say and not sending
mixed messages
it is less likely we'll ever have to use
troops but a president must
always be willing to use troops it must
as a last resort
i was hopeful diplomacy would
work in iraq
it was falling apart there was no doubt
in my mind
that saddam hussein was hoping that the
world would turn a blind eye
and if he had been in power in other
words if we would have said let the inspectors
work or let's
you know hope to talk him out maybe an
18th resolution would work
he would have been stronger and tougher and
the world would have been a lot worse off
there's just no doubt in my mind
we would rue the day had saddam hussein
been in power
so we use diplomacy every chance we get
believe me
and i would hope to never have to use
force but by speaking clearly and sending
messages that we mean what we say
we've affected the world in a positive
way look at libya
libya was a threat
libya is now peacefully dismantling its
weapons programs
libya understood that america and others
will enforce doctrine and that the world is
better for
it so to answer your question i would
hope we never have to i think by
acting firmly and decisively it will mean
it is
less likely we have to use force senator
kerry 90 seconds
jim the president just said something
extraordinarily revealing
and frankly very important in
this debate
in answer to your question about iraq
and sending people into iraq he just
said the enemy attacked us
saddam hussein didn't attack us osama
bin laden attacked us
al qaida attacked us and when we had
osama bin laden cornered in the
mountains of tora
bora 1,000 of his cohorts with him in
those mountains
with the american military forces nearby
and in the field
we didn't use the best trained troops in
the world to go kill the world's number
one criminal and terrorist
they outsourced the job to afghan
warlords who only a week earlier had been on the
other side fighting against us
neither of whom trusted each other
that's the enemy that attacked us that's
the enemy that was allowed to walk out
of those mountains that's the enemy that
is now
in 60 countries with stronger recruits
he also said saddam hussein would have
been stronger that is just
factually incorrect two-thirds of the
country was a no-fly zone when we
started this war
we would have had sanctions we would
have had the u.n inspectors
saddam hussein would have been
continually weakening
if the president had shown the patience
to go through another round of
resolution to sit down with those leaders say what
do you need what do you need now
how much more will it take to get you to
join us we'd be in a stronger place
today thirty seconds first of all of course i know osama bin
laden attacked us
i know that and secondly to think that
another round of resolutions
would have caused saddam hussein to
disarm disclose is ludicrous in my judgment it
just shows a
significant difference of opinion we
tried diplomacy
we did our best he was hoping to turn a
blind eye and yes he would have been
stronger had we not dealt with him
he had the capability of making weapons
and he would have made weapons
thirty seconds senator thirty-five to forty countries in
the world
had a greater capability of making
weapons at the moment the president
invaded than saddam hussein and while
he's been diverted with
9 out of 10 active duty divisions of
our army
either going to iraq coming back from
iraq or getting ready to go
north korea's gotten nuclear weapons
and the world is more dangerous iran is
moving toward nuclear weapons and the
world is more dangerous
darfur has a genocide the world is more
dangerous i'd have made a better choice new
question two minutes senator kerry what
is your position
on the whole concept of preemptive war
john f kerry the president always has the right and
always has had the right for preemptive
strike that was a great doctrine
throughout the cold war
and it was always one of the things we
argued about with respect to arms
control no president through all of american
history has ever
ceded and nor would i the right to
preempt in any way necessary to protect the
united states of america
but if and when you do it jim you have
to do it in a way
that passes the test that
passes the global test where your
countrymen your people
understand fully why you're doing what
you're doing and you can prove to the
world that you did it for legitimate
reasons here we have our own secretary of state
who has had to apologize to the world for
the presentation he made
to the united nations i mean we can
remember when president
kennedy in the cuban missile crisis sent
his secretary of state to paris to
meet with degaulle
and in the middle of the discussion
to tell them about the missiles in cuba
he said
here let me show you the photos and degaulle
waved them off and said no no no
no the word of the president of the united
states is good enough for me
how many leaders in the world today
would respond to us
as a result of what we've done in that
way so what is at test
here is the credibility of the united
states of america and how we lead the
world and iran and iraq are now more dangerous iran
and north korea are now more dangerous now
whether preemption is ultimately what has to
happen i don't know yet
but i'll tell you this as president i'll
never take my eye off that ball
i've been fighting for proliferation the
entire time anti-proliferation the entire time
i've been in the congress
and we've watched this president
actually turn away from some of the
treaties that were on the table
you don't help yourself with other
nations when you turn away from the
global warming treaty for instance
or when you refuse to deal at length
with the united nations you have to earn
that respect
and i think we have a lot of earning
back to do
ninety seconds let me
i'm not exactly sure what you mean
passes the global test you
take preemptive action if you pass a
global test
my attitude is you take preemptive
action in order to protect the american
people that you act in order to make this
country secure
my opponent talks about me not signing
certain treaties
let me tell you one thing i didn't sign
and i think it shows the difference of our
opinion the difference of opinions and that is i
wouldn't join the international criminal court this is a body based in the hague
where unaccountable judges and
prosecutors can pull our troops
or diplomats up for trial
and i wouldn't join it and i understand that
in certain capitals
around the world that that wasn't a
popular move
but it's the right move not to join a
foreign court that could
where our people could be prosecuted
my opponent is for joining the
international criminal court
i just think trying to be popular kind
of in the global sense
if it's not in our best interest makes
no sense i'm interested in working with
our nations and do a lot of it
but i'm not going to make decisions that
i think are wrong for america
jim lehrer new question mr president do you believe
that diplomacy and sanctions can resolve the
nuclear problems
with north korea and iran take them in
any order you would like
north korea first i do let me say i
certainly hope so
before i was sworn in the policy of this
government was to have bilateral
negotiations with north korea
and we signed an agreement with north
korea that my administration found out that
was not
being honored by the north koreans and
so i decided that
a better way to approach the issue was
to get other nations involved
just besides us and in crawford texas
jiang zemin and i
agreed that the nuclear-weapons-free
peninsula korean peninsula was in his
interest and
our interest and the world's interest
and so we began a new
dialogue with north korea one that
included not only the united states but
now china and china's a got a lot of
influence over north korea
some ways more than we do as well we
included south korea japan and russia so
now there are five voices speaking to
kim jong il
not just one and so if kim jong il
decides again to not honor an agreement
he's not only
doing injustice to america he'd be doing
injustice to china as well
and i think this will work it's not
going to work if we open up a dialogue
with kim jong il
thats what he wants he wants to unravel
the six party talks or the five-nation
coalition that's sending
him a clear message
on iran i hope we can do the same thing
continue to work with the world to
convince the iranian mullahs
to abandon their nuclear ambitions
we worked very closely with the foreign
ministers of france germany and great
britain who have been the folks delivering
the message to the mullahs that
if you expect to be part of the
world of nations get rid of your
nuclear programs the iaea is involved
there's a
special protocol recently been passed
that allows for inspections i
hope we can do it and we've got a good
strategy senator kerry 90 seconds with respect to
iran the british french and germans were the
ones who initiated an effort
without the united states regrettably to
begin to try to move to curb the nuclear
possibilities in iran i believe we could
have done better i think the united
states should have offered
the opportunity to provide the nuclear
fuel test them
see whether or not they were actually
looking for it for peaceful purposes
if they weren't willing to work a deal
then we could have put sanctions
together the president did nothing
with respect to north korea the real
story we had inspectors and television cameras
in the nuclear reactor in
north korea secretary bill perry
negotiated that under president clinton
and we knew where the fuel rods were and
we knew the limits on their nuclear
power colin powell our secretary of state
announced one day that we were going to
continue the dialog of working with the
north koreans the president reversed it
publicly while the president of south
korea was here
and the president of south korea went
back to south korea bewildered and
embarrassed because it went against his policy and
for two years this administration didn't
talk at all to north korea
while they didn't talk at all the fuel
rods came out
the inspectors were kicked out the
television cameras were kicked out
and today there are four to seven
nuclear weapons in the hands of north
korea that happened on this president's watch
now that
i think is one of the most serious sort
of reversals or mixed messages that
you could possibly send
i want to make sure yes sir but in this
one minute i want to make sure that we
understand the people
watching understand the differences
between the two of you on this
you want to continue the multinational
talks correct right and you're
willing to do it both i want
bilateral talks which put all of the
issues from the armistice of 1952 the economic
issues the human rights issues
the artillery disposal issues the dmz
issues and the nuclear issues on the table and
you're opposed to that
right the minute we have bilateral
talks the six-party talks will unwind
that's exactly what kim jong il
wants and by the way
the breach on the agreement was not
through plutonium the breach on the
agreement is highly enriched uranium
that's what we caught him doing
that's where he was breaking the
agreement secondly he said
my opponent said where he worked to put
sanctions on iran we've already
sanctioned iran
we can't sanction them any more there are
sanctions in place on iran
and finally we were a party to the
convention to working with germany france and great
britain to send their foreign ministers
into iran
new question two minutes senator kerry
you mentioned
darfur the darfur region of sudan fifty thousand people
have already died in that area more than
a million are homeless
and it's been labeled an act of ongoing
genocide yet neither one of you or
anyone else connected with your
campaigns or your administration that i
can find
has discussed the possibility of sending
in troops why not well i'll tell you
exactly why not but i first want to say
something about those sanctions on iran
only the united states put the sanctions
on alone and that's exactly what i'm
talking about
in order for the sanctions to be
effective we should have been working
with the british french and germans and
other countries and that's the
difference between the president and me
and there again he sort of slid by the
question now with respect to darfur
yes it is a genocide and months ago
many of us were pressing for action i
think the reason
that we're not saying send american
troops in at this point is severalfold
number one we can do this through the
african union
providing we give them the logistical
support right now all the president is
providing is humanitarian support
we need to do more than that they've got
to have the logistical capacity to go in
and stop the killing
and that's going to require more than is
on the table today
i also believe that it is one of the
reasons we can't do it is we're
overextended ask the people in the armed forces today
we've got guards and reserves who are
doing double duties
we've got a backdoor draft taking place
in america today
people with stop-loss programs where
they're told you can't get out of the
military nine out of our 10 active duty
divisions committed to iraq one way or
the other either going coming or
preparing so this is the way the president has
overextended the united states that's
why in my plan i add two active duty divisions
to the united states army
not for iraq but for our general demands
across the globe
i also intend to double the number of
special forces
so that we can do the job we need to do
with respect fighting the terrorists
around the world and
if we do that then we have the ability
to be able to respond more rapidly but
i'll tell you this as president
if it took american forces to some
degree to coalesce the african union
i'd be prepared to do it because we
could never allow another rwanda
it's a moral responsibility for us and
the world
ninety seconds back to iran just for a
second it was not my administration that put
the sanctions on iran
that happened long before i arrived in
washington dc
in terms of darfur
i agree it's genocide and colin powell
so stated we have committed $200 million
worth of aid we're the leading
donor in the world to help the suffering
people there
we will commit more over time to help
we were very much involved at the u.n on
the sanction
policy of the bashir government in the
sudan prior to darfur ambassador jack danforth
had been negotiating a north-south
agreement that we would have hoped would have brought
peace to the sudan
i agree with my opponent that we
shouldn't be committing troops
we ought to be working with the
african union to do so
precisely what we did in liberia we
helped stabilize the situation with some
troops and when the african union came
we moved them out
my hope is that the african union moves
rapidly to help
save lives and fortunately the rainy
season will be ending shortly which will
make it easier to get aid there and help
the long-suffering people there
new question
president bush clearly as we
have heard
major policy differences between the two
of you
are there also underlying character
issues that you believe
that you believe are serious enough to
deny senator kerry the job as
commander in chief of the united states
that's a loaded question well
first of all i admire
senator kerry's service to our country
i admire the fact that he is a great dad
i appreciate the fact that his daughters
have been so kind to my daughters in
what has been a pretty hard
experience for i guess young girls
seeing their dads out there campaigning
i admire the fact that
he served for 20 years in the senate
although i'm not so sure i admire the
record i won't hold it against him that he went
to yale
there's nothing wrong with that
my concerns about the senator is that in
the course of this campaign i've been
listening very carefully to what he says
and he changes positions on the war in
iraq he
changes positions on something as
fundamental as what you believe in your
core in your heart of hearts is right
in iraq you cannot lead
if you send mixed messages
mixed messages send the wrong signals to
our troops
our allies
mixed messages send the wrong signals to
the iraqi citizens
and that's my biggest concern about my
opponent i admire his service
but i
just know how this world works
and that in the councils of government
there must be certainty from the u.s
president of course we change tactics when need to
but we never change our
beliefs the strategic beliefs that are
necessary to protect this country in the
world ninety second response senator well first of
all i appreciate enormously
the personal comments the president
just made and i share them with him
i think only if you're
doing this and he's done it
more than i have in terms of the
presidency can you begin to get a sense
of what it means
to your families and it's tough and so
i acknowledge
that his daughters i've watched them i've
chuckled a few times at some of their
comments and i'm trying to put a leash on them
well i know i've learned not to do
that and i have great respect and
admiration for his wife i think she's
a terrific person thank you and a great first lady
but we do have differences i'm not going
to talk about a difference of character
i don't think that's my job or my
business but let me talk about something that the
president just sort of finished up with
maybe someone would call it a character
trait maybe somebody wouldn't
but this issue of certainty it's one
thing to be certain
but you can be certain and be wrong it's
another to be certain and be right
or to be certain and be moving in the right
direction or be certain about a
principle and then learn new facts and take those
new facts and put them to use in order
to change and get your policy right
what i worry about with the president is
that he's not acknowledging what's on
the ground he's not acknowledging the
realities of north korea he's not
acknowledging the truth of the science
of stem-cell research or of global
warming and other issues
and certainty sometimes can get you in
trouble thirty seconds well i think listen i fully
agree that
one should shift tactics and we
will in iraq our commanders have got all the
flexibility to do what is necessary
to succeed but what i won't do is change
my core values
because of politics or because of pressure
and it is one of the things i've
learned in the white house is that
there's enormous pressure on the
president and he cannot wilt under that
pressure otherwise
the world won't be better off
thirty seconds i have no intention of
wilting i've never wilted in my life
and i've never wavered in my life i know
exactly what we need to do in iraq and
my position
has been consistent saddam hussein is a
threat he needed to be disarmed we needed to go
to the u.n
the president needed the authority to
use force in order to be able to get him
to do something because he never did it
without the threat of force
but we didn't need to rush to war
without a plan to win the peace
new question two minutes senator kerry
if you are
elected president what will you take to
that office
thinking is the single most serious
threat to the national security to the
united states
nuclear proliferation nuclear
proliferation there's some 600-plus tons of unsecured
material still in the former soviet
union and russia
at the rate that the president is
currently securing it
it'll take 13 years to get it i did a
lot of work on this i wrote a book about
it several years ago six seven
years ago called the new war
which saw the difficulties of this
international criminal network
and back then we intercepted a suitcase
in a middle eastern country with nuclear
materials in it and the black market sale
price was about $250 million
now there are terrorists trying to get
their hands on that stuff today
and this president i regret to say has
secured less
nuclear material in the last two years
since 9/11
than we did in the two years preceding 9/11
we have to do this job and to do the job
you can't cut the money for it the
president actually
cut the money for it you have to put the
money into it and the funding and the
leadership and part of that leadership is sending
the right message to places like north
korea right now the president is spending
hundreds of millions of dollars to
research bunker-busting nuclear weapons the
united states
is pursuing a new set of nuclear weapons
it doesn't make sense
you talk about mixed messages we're
telling other people you can't have
nuclear weapons but we're
pursuing a new nuclear weapon that we
might even contemplate using
not this president i'm going to shut
that program down
and we're going to make it clear to the
world we're serious about containing
nuclear proliferation
and we're going to get the job of
containing all of that nuclear material
in russia done
in four years and we're going to build
the strongest international network to
prevent nuclear proliferation
this is the scale of what
president kennedy set out to do with the
nuclear test ban treaty it's our
generation's equivalent
and i intend to get it done ninety seconds
mr president actually we've increased funding for
dealing with nuclear proliferation
about 35 percent since i've been the president
secondly
we've set up what's called the well
first of all i agree with
my opponent that the biggest threat
facing this country is weapons of mass
destruction in the hands of a terrorist
network and that's why proliferation is
one of the centerpieces of a
multi-prong strategy to make the
country safer
my administration started what's called
the proliferation security initiative
over 60 nations involved with disrupting
the trans-shipment of information and/or
weapons of mass destruction materials
and we've been effective
we busted the a.q khan network
this was a proliferator out of pakistan
that was selling secrets to places like
north korea and libya
we convinced libya to disarm
it's a central part of dealing with
weapons of mass destruction and
proliferation i'll tell you another way to help
protect america in the long run is
to continue with missile
defenses and we've got a robust research and
development program
that has been ongoing during my
administration we'll be implementing a
missile-defense
system relatively quickly and that is
another way to help deal with the
threats that we face in the 21st century
my opponent
opposed the missile defenses
just for this one-minute
discussion here
just for whatever seconds it takes
so it's correct to say that
if somebody is listening to this that both
of you agree
if you're reelected mr president and if
you are elected the single
most serious threat you believe both of
you believe
is nuclear proliferation in the hands of
a terrorist enemy
weapons of mass destruction nuclear
proliferation but again the test
or the difference between us the
president has had four years to try to do
something about it
and north korea has got more weapons iran
is moving towards weapons
and at his pace it will take 13 years to
secure those weapons in russia
i'm going to do it in four years and i'm
going to immediately set out to
have bilateral talks with north korea
your response to that again i can't
tell you how big a mistake i think that
is to have bilateral talks with north
korea it's precisely what
kim jong il wants it will cause the
six-party talks to evaporate it will mean
that china no longer is involved in
convincing along with us for kim jong il to
get rid of his weapons
it's a big mistake to do that we must
have china's leverage on kim jong il
besides ourselves
and if you enter bilateral talks they'll
be happy to walk away from the table
i don't think that'll work all right
mr president this is the last
question and
two minutes it's a new subject new
question and it has to do with president
putin and russia did you misjudge him or
are you do you feel that what he is
doing in the name of antiterrorism by
changing some democratic processes
is ok no i don't think it's ok and
said so publicly
i think that there needs to be checks
and balances in a democracy
and made that very clear that by
consolidating power
in the central government he's sending a
signal to
the western world and united states
that perhaps he doesn't believe in
checks and balances and i told him
that i mean he's also a strong ally in the war on
terror he is listen they went through a
horrible situation in beslan where these
terrorists gunned down young school kids that's
the nature of the enemy
by the way that's why we need to be firm
and resolved
in bringing them to justice that's
precisely what vladimir putin
understands as well
i've got a good relation with vladimir
and it's important that we do have a
good relation because that enables me to
better comment to him and to better to discuss
with him some of the decisions he makes
i found that in this world that
it's important to establish good
personal relationships with people so
that when you have disagreements you're
able to disagree
in a way that is effective
and so i've told him my opinion i look
forward to discussing
it more with him as time goes on
russia is a country in
transition vladimir is going to have to make
some hard choices and i think it's very
important for the american president as
well as other western leaders to remind
him of the great benefits of democracy that
democracy will best
help the people realize their hopes and
aspirations and dreams
and i will continue working with him
over the next four years
ninety seconds senator kerry well let me
just say quickly that i've
had an extraordinary experience of
watching up close and personal that
transition in russia
because i was there right after the
transformation and i was
probably one of the first senators along
with senator bob smith of new hampshire
a former senator
to go down into the kgb underneath
treblinka square and see
reams of files with names in them
it sort of brought home the transition
to democracy that russia was trying to
make i regret what's happened in these past
months and i think it goes beyond just the
response to terror
mr putin now controls all the television
stations his political opposition is being put in
jail and i think it's very important to
the united states obviously to have
a working relationship that is good this
is a very important country to us we
want a partnership
but we always have to stand up for
democracy as george will said the other
day freedom on the march not in russia right
now now i'd like to come back for a quick
moment if i can to that issue about
china and the talks because that's
one of the most critical issues
here north korea
just because the president says it can't
be done
that you'd lose china doesn't mean it
can't be done
i mean this is the president who said
there were weapons of mass destruction
said mission accomplished said we could fight
the war on the cheap none of which were
true we could have bilateral talks with kim
jong il and we can get those weapons
at the same time as we get china because
china has an
interest in the outcome too
thirty seconds mr president
you know my opinion on north korea i
can't say it any more plainly well but when he used
the word truth again
pardon me talking about the
truth of the matter he used the word truth
again did that raise any hackles
with you oh i'm a pretty calm guy i
don't take it personally
ok all right you know we looked at
the same intelligence
and came to the same conclusion that
saddam hussein was a grave threat
and i don't hold it against him that he
said grave threat
i'm not going to go around the
country saying he didn't tell the truth
when he looked at the same intelligence
i did
it was a threat that's not the issue
the issue is what you do about it
the president said he was going to build a
true coalition
exhaust the remedies of the u.n and go
to war as a last resort
those words really have to mean
something and unfortunately he didn't go
to war as a last resort now we have this
incredible mess in iraq
$200 billion
it's not what the
american people
thought they were getting when they
voted all right that brings us
to closing statements and again
as determined by a coin toss senator
kerry you go first and you have two
minutes thank you jim very much thank you very
much to the university again thank you
mr president
my fellow americans as i've said at the
very beginning of this debate
both president bush and i love this
country very much there's no doubt
i think about that but we have a
different set of convictions
about how we make our country stronger
here at home
and respected again in the world
i know that for many of you sitting at
home parents of kids in iraq you want to
know who's the person who could be a
commander in chief who could get your kids
home and get the job done
and win the peace and for all the rest
of the parents in america who are
wondering about their kids going to the
school or anywhere else in the world
what kind of world they're going to grow
up in let me look you in the eye
and say to you i defended
this country as a young man in war and i
will defend it as president of the
united states
but i have a difference with this
president i believe when we're strongest when
we reach out and lead the world and build
strong alliances
i have a plan for iraq i believe we can
be successful i'm not talking about
leaving i'm talking about winning and we need a
fresh start a new credibility a
president who can bring allies to our
side i also have a plan to win the war on
terror funding homeland security
strengthening our military
cutting our finances reaching out to the
world again
building strong alliances i believe
america's best days are ahead of us
because i believe that the future
belongs to freedom not to fear
that's the country that i'm going to
fight for and i ask you to give me the
opportunity to make you proud
i ask you to give me the opportunity to
lead this great nation
so that we can be stronger here at home
respected again in the world
and have responsible leadership that we
deserve thank you and god bless america mr
president two minutes
thank you very much tonight jim
senator
if america shows uncertainty or weakness
in this decade the world will drift
toward tragedy
that's not going to happen so long as
i'm your president
the next four years we will continue to
strengthen our homeland defenses
we will strengthen our intelligence-gathering
services
we will reform our military the military
will be an all-volunteer army
we will continue to stay on the offense
we will fight the terrorists around the
world so we do not have to face them
here at home
we'll continue to build our alliances
i'll never turn over america's national
security needs to leaders of other
countries as we continue to build those alliances
and we'll continue to spread freedom
i believe in the transformational power
of liberty
i believe that the free iraq is in this
nation's interests
i believe a free afghanistan is in this
nation's interest and i believe both a
free afghanistan and a free iraq will
serve as a powerful example for millions who
plead in silence for liberty in the broader
middle east
we've done a lot of hard work together
over the last three and a half years
we've been challenged and we've risen to
those challenges
we've climbed the mighty mountain i see
the valley below and it's a valley of peace
by being steadfast and resolute
and strong by keeping our word
by supporting our troops we can achieve
the peace we all want
i appreciate your listening tonight
i ask for your vote and may god continue
to bless our great land
and that ends tonight's debate a
reminder the second presidential debate
will be a week from tomorrow october 8th
from washington university in st
louis charles gibson of abc news will
moderate a town hall-type event
then on october 13th from arizona state
university in tempe
bob schieffer of cbs news will moderate
an exchange on domestic policy
that will be similar in format to
tonight's also this coming tuesday at
case western reserve university in cleveland
the vice presidential candidates vice
president cheney and senator edwards
will debate
with my pbs colleague gwen ifill
moderating for now
thank you senator kerry president bush
from coral gables florida i'm jim lehrer
thank you and good night